DEGREE PROJECT IN VEHICLE ENGINEERING,
SECOND CYCLE, 30 CREDITS
STOCKHOLM, SWEDEN 2018

An Attempt Towards FE-Modelling
of Fracture Propagation in Railway
Wheels
FRED ÖHNANDER

KTH ROYAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY
SCHOOL OF ENGINEERING SCIENCES

Preface
This thesis is part of my Degree of Master of Science in Engineering in the field Vehicle
Engineering and is performed at the Division of Railway Technology, Department of
Aeronautical and Vehicle Engineering at the Royal Institute of Technology (KTH) in
Stockholm. The thesis is part of the FR8RAIL project arranged by the European rail initiative
Shift2Rail. The thesis has been carried out in cooperation with CAF MiiRA which is
dedicated to the design and manufacture of rail vehicle components.
Firstly, I would like to thank my supervisors Carlos Casanueva and Saeed Hossein-Nia for
their guidance in the work. Especially I would like to thank Saeed for your enthusiasm for the
project and for pushing me forward in the right direction. I also appreciate the literature
suggestions given by both Carlos and Saeed.
As a novice in Abaqus I have needed substantial help from people with experience with it.
Here, I would like to thank Farshad Shafieian, CAE Engineer at Scania Group, Anton
Shipsha, PhD student at KTH, and Per-Anders Jönsson, CEO for Tikab Strukturmekanik AB,
for all their help with answering my questions regarding Abaqus. I would also like to thank
Anton for your help in both explaining, as well as finding valuable information, about the
fundamentals of fracture mechanics.
I would also like to thank my master thesis colleagues for their feedback from the master
thesis presentations as well as the rest of the people in the department for their company and
discussions of both engineering subjects as well as various other discussions.
Finally, I would like to thank the love of my life, Sara, for all the encouragement and
positivity you bring when I am down. You are my best friend and you make me smile and
laugh almost every single day.
Fred Öhnander
ohnander@kth.se
Stockholm, June 2018

Abstract
The demand for higher velocities and heavier axle loads for freight trains leads to higher
forces on the railway wheels which in turn lead to an increase in stresses on and below the
surface of the wheel-rail contact. By time, this induces wear on the wheels which
consequently lead to higher maintenance costs and in some cases accidents. The ability to
predict the evolution of wheel profiles due to uniform wear has been demonstrated with a
rather accurate precision in most operational conditions. These wear models are based on
wear coefficients and since they are not usually valid for real operational conditions, the
models are generally calibrated against real-life scenarios in order to adjust the coefficients
from test conditions to real-life lubrication conditions. This engineering approach can be
useful in prediction of wear in systems where the materials and contact conditions do not
vary. However, when addressing material development focused on reducing specific damage
modes, the approach is of limited use because the obtained wear coefficients are not directly
related to material properties. Therefore, attempts towards developing physical fracture
propagation models that relates to the contact conditions and material properties have been
made. The purpose has been to retrieve vital information about where a fracture initiates and
how it propagates. In the long run, it is of great interest to be able to attain information about
how a material particle is removed from the contact surface. Studies for this type of model
was done in the 70’s and 80’s mainly with pin-disk experiments but has not been utilized in
the specific field of wheel-rail contact. The thesis is part of the FR8RAIL project arranged by
the European rail initiative Shift2Rail. Literature studies have been the basis for the thesis in
order to gain vital insights into fracture mechanics and other related fields. The physical
fracture propagation models have been constructed in the FE software Abaqus with the
implementation of the XFEM. For the 2D model, the fracture initiates at the top of the
implanted inclusion when the friction coefficient is
and propagates upwards a few
elements. For
, the fracture initiates at the right surface boundary where the pressure
distribution and traction is applied. The fracture propagation angle increases relative to the
surface as the friction coefficient value is increased. The fracture for the 3D model extends
broader compared to the 2D model at the top of the inclusion in the case of
. The
fracture initiates at the same surface location as for the 2D model for
. The fracture
propagation is however non-existent due to convergence problems. The FE-models
constructed are initial steps towards analysing the fracture propagation and closely related
phenomena for a railway freight wheel in detail. At the end of the thesis, the simplified
models give mainly information about the fracture initiation, propagation and its patterns.
From this first phase, further adjustments and improvements can take place in order to
eliminate the margins of error. In the long run, fully integrated models with further
implementations such as detailed microstructure for the contact conditions, plastic behaviour
for the material, and complete three-dimensional models can finally be employed.
Keywords: railway wheel, wheel-rail contact, wear, fracture initiation, physical fracture
propagation model, FE-model, fracture mechanics, XFEM, inclusion.

ii

Sammanfattning
Efterfrågan på högre hastigheter och tyngre axelbelastningar för godståg leder till högre
krafter på järnvägshjulen som i sin tur leder till ökade spänningar på och under ytan vid hjulräl-kontakten. Med tiden induceras slitage på hjulen som följaktligen leder till höga
underhållskostnader och i vissa fall olyckor. Förmågan att förutse utvecklingen av hjulprofiler
på grund av enhetligt slitage har visats kunna ske med en noggrann precision under de flesta
driftsförhållanden. Dessa slitagemodeller bygger på slitagekoefficienter, och eftersom de
vanligtvis inte är giltiga under realistiska driftsförhållanden är modellerna i allmänhet
kalibrerade mot verkliga händelseförlopp för att justera koefficienterna från testförhållandena
till realistiska smörjförhållanden. Detta tekniska tillvägagångssätt kan vara användbart vid
prognos av slitage i system där material och kontaktförhållanden inte varierar. När man
addresserar materialutveckling inriktad på att reducera specifika skadelägen är emellertid
tillvägagångssättet av begränsad användning eftersom de erhållna slitagekoefficienterna inte
är direkt relaterade till materialegenskaper. Därför har försök gjorts till att utveckla fysikaliska
sprickbildningsmodeller som relateras till kontaktförhållanden och materialegenskaper. Syftet
har varit att erhålla viktig information om var en spricka initieras och hur den fortskrider. I det
långa loppet är det även av stor vikt att kunna erhålla information om hur en materialpartikel
avlägsnas från kontaktytan. Studier för denna typ av modeller har gjorts på 70- och 80-talet i
huvudsak med stift- och skivexperiment men har inte använts inom det specifika området för
hjul-räl-kontakt. Avhandligen ingår i FR8RAIL-projektet som arrangeras av det europeiska
järnvägsinitiativet Shift2Rail. Literaturstudier har varit grunden för avhandlingen för att få
väsentlig insikt i frakturmekanik och andra relaterade områden. De fysiska
sprickbildningsmodellerna har konstrueras i FE-mjukvaran Abaqus med XFEM som
implementering. För 2D-modellen initieras sprickan överst vid den implanterade
imperfektionen när friktionskoefficienten är
och propagerar uppåt några få element.
För
initieras sprickan på högra ytgränsen där tryckfördelning och friktionskraft
appliceras. Utbredningsvinkeln för sprickan ökar relativt till ytan då friktionskoefficienten
ökar. Sprickan för 3D-modellen breder ut sig mer jämfört med 2D-modellen överst vid
imperfektionen då
. Sprickan initieras på samma ytplats som för 2D-modellen vid
. Sprickbildningen är dock obefintlig på grund av konvergensproblem. De
konstruerade FE-modellerna är initiala steg mot att analysera sprickutbredningen och
närbesläktade fenomen för ett godstågs järnvägshjul i detalj. I slutet av avhandlingen ger de
förenklade modellerna huvudsakligen information om sprickinitiering, utbredning och dess
mönster. Ytterligare justeringar och förbättringar kan ske efter denna första fas i syfte att
eliminera felmarginalerna. På lång sikt kan slutligen helt integrerande modeller med
ytterligare implementeringar såsom detaljerad mikrostruktur för kontaktförhållandena,
oelastiskt materialbeteende och kompletta tredimensionella modeller användas.
Nyckelord:
järnvägshjul,
hjul-räl-kontakt,
slitage,
sprickinitiering,
sprickbildningsmodell, FE-modell, frakturmekanik, XFEM, imperfektion.

iii

fysisk

Table of Contents
PREFACE ..................................................................................................................................I
ABSTRACT ............................................................................................................................. II
SAMMANFATTNING ......................................................................................................... III
1

INTRODUCTION............................................................................................................. 1

2

WEAR ................................................................................................................................ 3

2.1

Introduction ..................................................................................................................... 3

2.2

Adhesive Wear Mechanisms ........................................................................................... 4

2.3

Wear-Regime Map for Metals......................................................................................... 5

2.4

Delamination Wear ......................................................................................................... 7

3
3.1
4

CONTACT MECHANICS ............................................................................................... 9
Hertzian Line Contact in Full-Slip .................................................................................. 9
FRACTURE MECHANICS .......................................................................................... 13

4.1

Crack Initiation .............................................................................................................. 13

4.2

The Stress Intensity Approach ...................................................................................... 14

4.3

Effect of Specimen Geometry ....................................................................................... 17

4.4

Linear Elastic Fracture Mechanics (LEFM) .................................................................. 20

4.5

Elasto-Plastic Fracture Mechanics (EPFM) .................................................................. 20

4.6

Extended Finite Element Method (XFEM) ................................................................... 21

5

FE-MODELLING ........................................................................................................... 24

5.1

2D Model....................................................................................................................... 25

5.2

3D Model....................................................................................................................... 27

6

RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS ................................................................................... 29
iv

6.1

2D Model....................................................................................................................... 29

6.2

3D Model....................................................................................................................... 34

6.3

General .......................................................................................................................... 35

7

CONCLUSIONS ............................................................................................................. 37

8

FUTURE WORK AND RESEARCH ........................................................................... 38

REFERENCES ....................................................................................................................... 40

v

1 Introduction
The demand for higher velocities and heavier axle loads for freight trains leads to higher
forces on the railway wheels. The increase of forces leads in turn to an increase in stresses on
the surface and below the surface of the wheel-rail contact. By time, this induces wear on the
wheels which consequently lead to higher maintenance costs and in some cases accidents.
Thus, for the safety aspect as well as for the future prospect of freight trains and its
competitiveness, there is a desire to reduce the maintenance required.
Nowadays, models that predict the wheel profile evolution have been demonstrated the ability
to predict with a rather accurate precision the evolution of wheel and rail profiles due to
uniform wear in most operational conditions. These wear models are based on wear
coefficients, where removal of material in the wheel-rail contact is related to a coefficient
which depends on a set of contact conditions. In order to obtain the wear coefficients
experimentally, various laboratory tests have been carried out. Yet, analyses of these
coefficients demonstrate their invalidity for real operational conditions. Thus, the models are
generally calibrated against real-life scenarios in order to adjust the coefficients from test
conditions to real-life lubrication conditions. This engineering approach can be useful in
prediction of wear in systems where the materials and contact conditions do not vary.
However, when addressing material development in the focus on reducing specific damage
modes, the approach is of limited use. This is because the obtained wear coefficients are not
directly related to material properties.
In the pursuance of solving this kind of problem, it is of great necessity to develop physical
fracture propagation models that relates to the contact conditions and material properties. The
aim is to utilize the models for the sake of retrieving vital information about where a fracture
initiates and how it propagates. Specifically, different propagation patterns alongside with
typical positions on the railway wheel where cracks usually initiate is of great importance. In
the long run, it is of great interest to be able to attain information about how a material
particle is removed from the contact surface. Additionally, valuable results such as wear in
form of loss of material volume or dissipation of energy per distance travelled are of great
significance alongside with knowledge about how the pressure distribution and friction force
in the contact surface relates to certain phenomena. Studies for this type of model was done in
the 70’s and 80’s mainly with pin-disk experiments but has not been utilized in the specific
field of wheel-rail contact.
The thesis is part of the FR8RAIL project arranged by the European rail initiative Shift2Rail.
Shift2Rail aims at accelerating the integration of new and advanced technologies into
innovative rail product solutions. The initiatives’ ambitions in the long run is to double the
capacity of the European rail system, increase its reliability and service quality by 50% while
at the same time reducing the life-cycle costs by also 50% [1]. The FR8RAIL project is about
the development of functional requirements for sustainable and attractive European rail
freight. The project aims at developing track friendly and low maintenance freight waggons.
The development of new types of running gear concepts that will reduce wheel-rail contact
1

forces is one strategy to achieve this. The specific goals of the FR8RAIL project are to reduce
the cost of freight transport measured by tonnes per km by 10%, reduce the time variations
during dwelling by 20%, and increase attractiveness of logistic chains by making available
100% of the rail freight transport information to logistic chain information systems [2].
It is of great necessity and importance to streamline the fracture propagation model in order
for it to work properly and for it to be flexible to different input data. There is also of great
significance to make simplifications in order to be able to achieve the desired result in the
given time frame. A relatively large block which encompasses the contact patch will be used
in order to reduce the influence of reaction forces from the boundaries. The rails will be seen
as being idealized with smooth surface roughness which will imply that no asperities are
related to the material surface of the rails. This simplification makes the application process of
the pressure distribution and friction force to the wheel contact surface under study much
more straightforward. The distribution and traction are based on Hertzian theory where only
full-slip condition for the sliding is assumed. Only the tread of the wheel will be taking into
account, disregarding flange contact. The location of the wheel-rail contact stresses is the
same for every load cycle. The plastic behaviour of the material is neglected and therefore the
behaviour of the material is only elastic.
Literature studies will start off the project in order to gain vital insights of for instance the
fundamentals of wear, fracture mechanics and software techniques and strategies. The
physical fracture propagation models will be constructed in the finite element and computeraided engineering software called Abaqus. For the fracture analyses, the extended finite
element method (XFEM) which is implemented into Abaqus, is utilized.
The project can be divided into two larger sections; theory and simulation. The theory will
start off with a chapter of wear which will include adhesive wear mechanisms, wear-regime
map for metals and delamination wear. This is followed up with a chapter about contact
mechanics which go into detail about the Hertzian line contact in full-slip. Thereafter, an
extensive chapter about the fundamentals of fracture mechanics will be presented. In this
chapter, the reason for cracks to initiate will be discussed alongside with the energy-balance
approach, the stress intensity approach, the effect of specimen geometry as well as methods to
analyse fracture growth together with the XFEM. The pre-processing of the simulations will
then be described in the chapter FE-modelling. Here, the processes of constructing the
physical fracture propagation models of a simplified railway wheel in ABAQUS will be
explained. The results of the simulations are presented and interpreted in the upcoming results
and discussions chapter. From the discussions, some conclusions have been made and are
explained in the chapter conclusions. Finally, what should be done in order to further improve
the fracture propagation models created is discussed in the future work and research chapter.

2

2 Wear
The goal of this thesis is to create fracture propagation models that can relate to contact
conditions and material properties. In the future however, in order to gain vital insights about
the removal of the material, the models need to account for wear related phenomena.
Furthermore, adhesive wear is of great importance when considering the detailed
microstructure of the wheel surface. The wear-regime map is useful for depicting the various
regimes in which different modes of wear dominate. Therefore, the fundamentals of wear are
presented in this chapter followed by adhesive wear mechanisms and wear-regime map for
metals. Finally, due to its relation to adhesive wear and its great influence on wheel and rail
wear, delamination wear will conclude this chapter.

2.1 Introduction
Railway vehicles use friction to transfer forces in the wheel-rail contact surface. Pressure and
friction forces are making it possible for the wheel-sets to follow a certain track and be able to
accelerate and brake. There is however creep forces that are arising from sliding motions
between the wheel and the rail as the wheels are running along the track. The main two
phenomena that causes changes in the geometrical shape of the wheel is material removal and
material subjected to plastic deformation. Flange wear is caused mainly by curve negotiation
alongside with stiff wheel-sets that contribute to higher yaw angles relative to the track. The
tread wear however is caused by the normal forces from the wheel-rail contact combined with
creepages and creep forces but also traction and braking forces [3].
Wear can from a tribology point of view be defined as the damage to a solid surface involving
continuous loss of material and repositioning of material in the case of two surfaces
interacting through a relative motion. There are many different influences to material wear
and it lies not only in the sole properties of the material but also in the geometry of the bodies
in contact, surface roughness, loading, lubrication and environment. There are usually
complicated mechanisms that causes these wear damages and many times they are
indistinguishable from one another. However, the main mechanisms that are wheel-rail related
are [4]:
There are mainly four different mechanical wear types:
 Abrasive wear – Is the cutting on the surface by hard particles or hard asperities
against each other.
 Adhesive wear – Is the removal of material due to adhesion between the wheel and rail
surfaces.
 Corrosive wear – Corrosive wear occurs when there is abrasive and adhesive wear in a
corrosive environment.
 Rolling contact fatigue (RCF) – Occurs when continuous and repeated application of a
load (cyclic loading) on a material eventually degrades it and finally leads to fatigue.
To be more specific, the cyclic loading can induce surface or subsurface cracks [3] [4].

3

The rolling contact fatigue of the wheels is often categorized based on the distance of where
the cracks are initiated compared to the surface of the wheel. These are:
 Surface initiated fatigue
 Sub-surface initiated fatigue (3-10 mm from the surface)
 Deep-surface initiated fatigue (10-25 mm from the surface)
The sub-surface and deep-surface cracks are quite rare, yet these two are the most dangerous
ones when compared to the surface cracks and might cause derailments. Where there exist a
low fatigue resistance of the material such as microscopic manganese sulphide inclusions
(sub-surface) and voids (deep-surface), there are great risks for both of the phenomena to
occur. Surface initiated cracks are conversely often harmless and easy to cope with and
oftentimes dealt with through reprofiling of the wheel profiles or even by regular natural
wear. However, reprofiling is costly, especially when it interrupts the operation of the trains.
It may also escalate the track degradation that is caused by high impact forces [4].

2.2 Adhesive Wear Mechanisms
This section is mainly based on Wear Analysis for Engineers by Raymond G. Bayer [5].
The rudimentary concept for adhesive mechanisms is that the contact between the surfaces
occurs at discrete points within the apparent area of contact. These points, that are called
junctions, are bonding between the surface asperities. If the two surfaces move in relation to
each other, the junctions get broken and new ones are formed. Where the bond is strong
enough the fracture will occur within the weaker asperity. Otherwise the separation will take
place at the interface between the asperities. The transferred material may as a result of stored
elastic energy detach itself once the separation has occurred. Or it might even become
detached as a result of subsequent contact which forms loose particle-like wear debris.
Usually, large quantities of plastic deformation are associated with these mechanisms.
Regarding these types of mechanisms, the primary wear scar feature that is indicative is the
presence of transferred material. This transferred material is usually in the form of attached
and highly deformed chunks. The wear debris is the secondary feature form. It should be
highly deformed and particle-like, rather than platelets or flakes, for adhesive mechanisms.
However, in all cases of adhesive wear, these features may not be observed since the material
that is transferred can be detached from surfaces and the shape of wear debris can be altered
after it is formed. The specific form of Archard’s wear equation that is commonly used for
adhesive wear is the following:
(2.1)
Where V is the volume of wear, P is the load, S is the distance of sliding, and p is the
penetration hardness of the softer material. The probability of transfer at junction is defined as
K.

4

The tendency for which adhesive wear to occur can be associated with the properties of the
two materials in contact and the state of their surfaces. Generally, it can be noted that
properties or conditions that ensures that the formation of strong bonds are enhanced between
the two surfaces will increase the probability of adhesive wear. Correspondingly, certain
conditions that tend to inhibit the bonding between surfaces decrease the probability of
adhesive wear. Factors that tend to increase the probability of adhesive wear are high surface
energy, similar crystal structure, chemical affinity and mutual solubility. Surface
contamination, oxides and lubricants often tend to reduce the probability of adhesive wear.
The contact pressure has also an impact on the tendency for adhesive wear and the value of K
apart from the material factors mentioned earlier. A reduced contact pressure has a tendency
to also reduce K. For transfer to occur a minimum contact pressure is needed. Adhesive
mechanisms may or may not be significant in different tribosystems, it all depends on the
influence of different factors such as material properties, surface conditions and contact stress.
Bonding is the distinguishing feature of adhesive wear mechanisms. It is however not the
necessarily the only phenomenon that can be involved. For adhesive wear the probability of
transfer is mainly affected by the relative strength of the bond to the strength of the asperity or
surface. The transfer does not occur if the bond is weaker. Therefore, possible factors in
adhesive wear behaviour are processes that affect the strength of either the bond or the
asperity. In different tribosystems, some different examples of phenomena that may affect the
significance of adhesive wear are oxide formation, work hardening, crack formation and
thermal softening. The stronger the bond is, the more force it takes to separate the junction.
Severe adhesive wear is possible for conditions like unlubricated sliding between self-mated
metals and unlubricated sliding between different metals. Generally the tendency for adhesive
wear is considered to be the highest among these conditions. For metal-non-metal pairs, nonmetal pairs and lubricated pairs the tendency is substantially reduced. Any adhesive wear
mechanism is likely to fall under the mild category for these combinations. The common
engineering tool for reducing adhesive wear between materials is lubrication.

2.3 Wear-Regime Map for Metals
The foundation of this subchapter has been retrieved from Tribology – Friction and Wear of
Engineering Materials by I. M. Hutchings [6].
The wear-regime map is a useful means of depicting the various regimes in which different
modes of wear dominate. For steels sliding in air in the common pin-on-disc geometry, see
Figure 1. Unlubricated sliding of most metals in air will fall under the general form even
though the details of the map are specific for steels. The wear map is plotted with
dimensionless variables. These variables are the normalized contact pressure (the normal load
on the specimen pin divided by the nominal contact area times the indentation hardness of the
softer material), and a normalized velocity (which is the sliding velocity divided by the
velocity of heat flow).

5

Figure 1: The wear-regime map for metals [6].

There are eight distinct regimes that can be identified in the wear-regime map. Regime I is
associated with very high contact pressure where gross seizure of the surfaces occurs. This
regime corresponds to the catastrophic growth of asperity junctions. The consequence is that
the real area of contact becomes equal to the apparent area.
For regime II where relative low sliding velocities and high loads are occurring, the thin
surface oxide film on the steel is penetrated at asperity contacts. This is a regime of severe
wear which includes high surface tractions and the formation of metallic wear debris. Since
the sliding velocity is low, the thermal effects are negligible.
In regime III the oxide is not being penetrated since there are lower loads compared to the II
regime. Since the wear is mild there is formation of only oxide debris.
For regime IV high loads and sliding speeds are occurring. Since frictional power dissipation
is high and thermal conduction is ineffective at removing heat from the interface, melting
occurs. This regime incorporates high wear rate which lead to metal being removed as
metallic droplets.
Regime V has low contact pressure but high sliding speed where the interface temperature is
still high. The temperature is however below melting point which means that surface
oxidation occurs rapidly. For this regime, the debris is oxide which consequently means that
the wear is mild.
In regime VI local oxide growth is caused due to occurring hot-spots at asperity contacts.
From this oxide layer the wear debris is spalling.
6

Metallic contact occurs at asperities for regime VII, which leads to severe wear through the
formation of metallic debris.
For regime VIII, formation of martensite arises at the interface through local heating of
asperities. This is followed by quenching through heat conduction into the bulk. Since
martensite has a high strength it provides local mechanical support of the oxide film, which
aids to reduce the amount of wear. Subsequently, the formation of oxide debris is the reason
for wear to occur.

2.4 Delamination Wear
The delamination wear, or delaminative wear, is a wear type related to the adhesive wear
mechanism that has large influence on the wheel and rail wear. This is the type of wear which
has been specifically focused on when attempts for the simulation has been done. This
subchapter is mainly based on An overview of the delamination theory of wear by Nam P. Suh
[7].
There are five processes that are involved in delamination wear: transmission of forces,
deformation, crack nucleation, crack propagation, and wear sheet separation. These sequential
events which lead to wear particle formation for the delamination theory of wear are
thoroughly described below. However, the events may be more independent if there are preexisting subsurface cracks.
1. Via adhesive and plowing actions, the pressure and friction forces are transmitted
through the contact points when two sliding surfaces come into contact. Softer surface
asperities are easily deformed and some are even fractured by the repeated loading
action. Either when these asperities are deformed or when they are removed, a
relatively smooth surface is generated. The contact is not just an asperity-to-asperity
contact once the surface becomes smooth. Now, the contact is rather an asperity-plane
contact where each point along the softer surface experiences cyclic loading as the
asperities of the harder surface plow it.
2. Plastic shear deformation is induced due to that the surface traction is utilized by the
harder asperities on the softer surface. This plastic deformation accumulates with
repeated loading.
3. As a result of the continuous subsurface deformation, cracks are nucleated below the
surface. Because of a triaxial state of highly compressive stress that exists right below
the contact regions, nucleation of cracks exceedingly close to the surface is not
favoured.
4. Additional loading and deformation causes cracks to extend and propagate once they
are present. This can lead to a network of cracks when the cracks are joining
neighbouring ones. The cracks tend to propagate parallel to the surface at a depth that
is governed by material properties and the coefficient of friction. The nucleation of the
crack is the rate controlling mechanism in the case when cracks cannot propagate as a
consequence of either limited deformation or a tangential traction at the asperity
contact which is extremely small.
7

5. At certain weak positions, the cracks finally shear to the surface and create long and
thin delaminating wear sheets. The location of the subsurface crack growth controls
the thickness of a wear sheet. Though, the subsurface crack growth is in turn governed
by the pressure and friction forces at the surface.
To some extent the surfaces created by the delamination wear process, but mainly all
machined surfaces, have asperities. In the occurrence of harder surfaces sliding over softer
surfaces, the softer asperities either deform or fracture immediately. By the sliding process
and the mechanism of removal, the rate at which these asperities are removed depend on the
initial surface roughness, the applied load and the mechanical properties of the asperities.
Generation of wear particles occur when a subsurface crack breaks through to the surface. The
crack reaches the surface after the asperity moves over the crack since the propagating end of
the crack always is located behind the moving asperity. Here, the propagating end of the crack
is usually the crack tip where the stress is maximal. As a result of this, the particle is elevated
from the surface so that the underside of the wear particle is facing the direction opposite to
the slider motion, see Figure 2. Compared to similar flat particles that are formed by the
deformed asperities, this direction is opposite to that. Thus, this enables a distinction between
particles formed by deformed asperities and from those formed by subsurface crack
propagation.

Figure 2: Wear sheet formation in an iron solid solution. The sheet is lifting up opposite to the sliding direction
which in this figure is from right to left [7].

In the next chapter, the fundamentals of contact mechanics will be presented including Hertz
theory along with the Hertzian line contact with rolling or sliding in full-slip.
8

3 Contact Mechanics
The area of contact mechanics is important to consider for both a wear phenomenon aspect as
well as for a fracture mechanics point of view. Of especially great interest for a fracture
mechanics aspect is the resulting shear stresses on and below the surface. Hence, this chapter
contain an introduction to Hertz theory and its assumptions together with a subchapter about
Hertzian line contact with rolling or sliding in full-slip. This contact mechanics chapter is
mainly based on the information given by Hossein-Nia, On Heavy-Haul Wheel Damages
using Vehicle Dynamics Simulation [4].
The researcher at the University of Berlin, Heinrich Hertz, published a paper called On the
contact of elastic solids in 1882. This can be seen as the start of the knowledge of contact
mechanics as the theory in Hertz’s paper provides a closed-form solution to the normal
contact problem. The assumptions that are the basis for the Hertz theory are:
 Displacements and strains are small.
 The bodies in contact are homogeneous, isotropic and linearly elastic.
 Smooth surfaces where the surface roughness is neglected (frictionless contact)
 The dimensions of the contact patch are significantly smaller than the dimensions of
the bodies in contact. The dimensions of the patch are furthermore also smaller than
the relative radii of the bodies in contact. Due to an assumption where the contact
partners are semi-infinite bodies limited by a straight plane, the stresses can from this
be approximately calculated. This is the so called half-space assumption.
 The curvature of the bodies in contact is constant.
 The materials of the bodies are quasi-identical.
The Hertz theory can often be used in many railway applications since the assumptions of the
theory are here generally valid. Some of the assumptions could however be violated in a few
cases. For instance, in case of high loads that are above the elastic shakedown and where
some plastic flow could appear, linear elasticity is not valid. The size and shape of the patch is
affected by this. Furthermore, where wheel and rail have a conformal contact, the half-space
assumption is uncertain. This can occur due to wheel profile wear or flange contact.

3.1 Hertzian Line Contact in Full-Slip
For a cylinder with radius R that is rolling and/or sliding in full-slip condition over an elastic
half space, the interface patch will be modelled as a line of contact with the half-length of a,
see Figure 3. The normal pressure is then according to Hertz:
( )

(

)

where,

(

)
9

(3.1)

Here,

is the equivalent modulus of elasticity and

the point of contact.

Figure 3: Cylinder in rolling-sliding contact with an elastic half-space [4].

The tangential traction, ( ), will in the presence of friction be:
( )

(

)

(3.2)

As can be noted in the equation for the normal pressure is the similarity to the equation for the
tangential traction where the only difference is the friction coefficient for the latter. When
the stresses in longitudinal and vertical directions are retrieved along with the shear stress
(which will not be derived here), the principal shear stress can be expressed as:
((

)

)

(3.3)

In Figure 4, the contours of the normalised principal shear stress
is visualised at surface
and sub-surface under rolling with different friction coefficients. This is achieved with help
from a Matlab script retrieved from Saeed Hossein-Nia where equation (3.3) is utilized. The
friction coefficients range from
to
with an increment of
from top left to
bottom right. For the case of
it can be seen that the maximum shear stress is located
below the surface at
where
is the symmetry line.

10

left),

Figure 4: The normalised principal shear stress with
(
)
(
)
(
)
(

(top
(

)
).

Under a sliding contact however, the condition is different both at the surface and below the
surface. Due to tangential traction ( ), the longitudinal stress
reaches its maximum
compressive stress at the surface (
) with the value
at the leading edge of the
contact area (
). At the trailing edge (
), the maximum tension
is reached. The
normal pressure applied at the surface leads to an equal stress at the surface. In Figure 5 the
surface stresses due to the frictional traction ( ) is visualized.

11

Figure 5: Surface stresses for sliding contact with friction [4].

An increased magnitude of the maximum principal shear stress occurs when the tangential
traction ( ) is increased. Moreover, higher friction values tend to move it closer to the
surface. For example, the growth of the maximum value of the principal shear stress for the
case with friction value
to the case with
is roughly 13%. This location moves
towards the trailing edge (
) of the contact patch at the surface.
In the upcoming chapter, theory about fracture mechanics will be presented which
specifically include crack initiation, the stress intensity approach, effect of specimen
geometry, linear elastic fracture mechanics (LEFM), elasto-plastic fracture mechanics and
extended finite element method (XFEM).

12

4 Fracture Mechanics
Failure due to fracture creates high costs and can lead to many casualties and injuries. There
are many different reasons for which failures have occurred historically. Among these reasons
include uncertainties in the loading or environment, inadequacies in design, deficiencies in
construction or maintenance as well as defects in the materials. It is of great necessity to
consider as many factors as possible that could lead to failure when life is at risk. The
information provided in this chapter is predominantly based on Introduction to Fracture
Mechanics, by David Roylance [8].
By manipulation of the microstructure so as to inhibit dislocation motion, the strength of
structural metals like steel can be increased to very high levels. This unfortunately renders the
material increasingly brittle. This can lead to the risks of cracks forming and propagating
catastrophically with very little warning. Engineering disasters that are related directly to this
phenomenon are an unfortunate number. Since there are procedures available that can
safeguard against brittle fractures, engineers must be aware of these measures.
In high-strength materials the central difficulty in designing against fracture is that the local
stresses can be modified by the presence of cracks to such an extent that the elastic stress
analyses are insufficient even though the evaluation by the designers is carefully employed. A
crack can propagate catastrophically through the structure when it reaches a certain critical
length. This can occur even though the gross stress is much less than what would normally
cause yield or failure in a tensile specimen. Fracture mechanics is the area of study which
refers to a vital specialization within solid mechanics in which the presence of a crack is
assumed. For the crack, one aspires to find some quantitative relations between its length and
the material’s inherent resistance to crack growth as well as the stress at which the crack
propagates at high speed to cause structural failure.

4.1 Crack Initiation
Research around the initiation of fractures is extremely vital in the prevention of early failures
in machine equipment, vehicles or its components. The safety aspects of evaluating the
behaviour of crack initiation are quite indisputable. There is however additional incentives
such as to increase the efficiency and reliability in for instance the train services while
concurrently reducing the maintenance costs.
Nucleation of fractures is a complex process that is controlled both by the repartition of flaws
in matter and by mechanical controls that make nuclei active or not, according to Davy et al.
[9]. Here, flaws in matter can be pores, grain boundaries, cleavage planes, etc. The result of
this is damage in the form of a micro crack that leads to the formation of faults or joints. The
term nuclei can be used when describing the flaws that can be considered as growing cracks
and the term flaws can be considered the imperfections in the material which has not been
activated as of yet or grows considerably slower than cracks of the same characteristics. It
seems that the main likely reason why nuclei forms is that it is related to stress redistribution
by growing cracks, stress increase, thermal activation, chemical corrosion etc. There is a
13

feedback loop between the fracture nucleation and growth due to stress redistribution which
can, depending on the initial distribution of weak and strong area defects, result in strikingly
different geometries of the eventual fracture pattern.
Oliveira et al. [10] suggests that most of the studies of contact fracture have considered the
behaviour of uncoated brittle solids where the analyses of fracture under sliding contact are of
particular interest. Calculations show that cracks initiate at the surface immediately behind the
contact where the tensile stress is the greatest when an indenter slides over the surface of a
homogeneous solid. One usually observes an array of cracks in the wake of the indenter since
several adjacent cracks might propagate in this way. The coefficient of sliding friction seems
to be particularly significant for the fracture load. The fracture load is furthermore sensitive to
the initial flaw size in the solid.
According to Spriestersbach et al. [11], cracks are often induced from so called non-metallic
inclusions. An inclusion is any material that is trapped inside another material or just air
bubbles inside a material. Around these inclusions the stresses tend to be much higher than in
the rest of the material and this is one reason for the initiation of cracks in these regions.
Fatigue properties in the high cycle fatigue regime are strongly affected by flaws inside the
material like non-metallic inclusions.
There is a higher potency of crack initiation in materials where there is a case of serious
property mismatching between matrix and defects. Also, higher strength materials seem to be
more sensitive to soft inclusions, where the elastic modulus is lower than the matrix, as stated
by Zhu et al. [12].
According to Ekberg [13], pores seem to be one of the most dangerous types of material
imperfections in railway wheels and according to the theory of elasticity; the shape of the
defect will have a major influence. In reality, it is however not certain that this influence is
equally severe for the loaded component. This is because a defect will be entrenched in a
smoothly shaped volume of plastically deformed material. According to the theory of
plasticity, the defect size has no influence. The defect will nevertheless have an effect in
reality where the estimation of the magnitude can be made using a model based on a criterion
that was originally proposed by Murakami [14] [15].

4.2 The Stress Intensity Approach
Even though the energy-balance approach can provide some insights to the fracture process
(study [8] for more information), an alternative method that examines the stress state near the
tip of a sharp crack directly has in engineering practices been proven more useful. This
method is called the stress intensity approach. It is common to treat three types of cracks in
fracture mechanics that is termed as mode I, II, and III as visualised in Figure 6. Mode I is the
tensile-opening mode and is especially emphasized in this section while mode II and III are
different shear sliding modes; in-plane shear and out-of-plane shear respectively.

14

Figure 6: The three types of cracks in fracture mechanics are mode I (Opening), II (In-plane shear), and III
(Out-of-plane shear) [16].

The opening-mode stress equations which are based on the semi-inverse method developed by
Westergaard are shown below:

√

√

√

( ){

( )

(

)}

(4.1)

( ){

( )

(

)}

(4.2)

( )

(

)

( )

(4.3)

The second and higher order terms that are indicated by dots may be neglected for distances
close to the crack tip (
). These relations cease to apply at large distances from the
crack tip where the stresses approach their far-field values that would be obtained where the
crack is not present. A very important parameter that is present in the equations above is the
stress intensity factor (SIF), . Here, the subscript I refer to the crack opening mode.
However, similar relations apply in the modes II and III. Three factors are shown in the
equations that taken together depict the stress near the crack tip; the denominator factor
(
)
acts as the stress distribution’s singular nature; σ is approaching infinity as the
crack tip is approached, with a dependency of
. The angular dependency is separable as
another factor; e.g.

( )(

( )

( ))

The stress intensity factor,

,

contains the dependence on applied stress
, the specimen geometry, and the crack length a.
It gives the overall intensity of the stress distribution, henceforth its name.
In a large sheet for the specific case of a central crack of width 2a or and edge crack of length
2a, the SIF can be expressed as:
√
For an edge crack of length a in the edge of a large sheet the SIF can be expressed as:
15

(4.4)

√
In Table 1, some expressions for

(4.5)

for some several geometries are given.

Table 1: Stress intensity factors for different types of cracks and common geometries [8].

It is in the design and analysis that the SIFs are used by arguing that the material can
withstand crack tip stresses up to a critical value of stress intensity that is termed
. Beyond
this critical value of stress intensity, the crack propagates rapidly. This critical stress intensity
factor can then be explained as being a measure of material toughness. Related to the crack
length a, and the fracture toughness is the failure stress which is expressed as:

√

(4.6)

where the geometrical parameter is equal to 1 for edge cracks and for other situations it is
generally on the order of unity. For a wide variety of specimen and crack geometries there are
tabulated expressions for and for new situations the finite element methods are available to
compute it.
The stress intensity and energy viewpoints are interrelated and for in plane stress the relation
is:

16

√

(4.7)

⇒

√

For plane strain the relation can be expressed as:
(

)

(4.8)

)
Metals with Poisson’s ratio of
give the factor (
which is not a big
change. The numerical values of
and
are however very different from each other in
plane stress and plane strain situations.
The fracture toughness
and
for various materials is listed in Table 2. It can be noticed
that they vary over a wide range from material to material. Among the most common
materials, steel alloys are the best regarding absolute resistance to crack propagation.
However, when rated on a per-pound base, some polymers can be very tough as well.
Table 2: Fracture toughness of different materials [8].

4.3 Effect of Specimen Geometry
The material toughness, or in other words the resistance to crack growth in a material, is
governed by the energy absorbed as the crack moves forward. This energy is, for an
exceptionally brittle material like window glass, primarily just that of rupturing the chemical
bonds along the plane of the crack. By far the largest part of the fracture energy is being
associated with plastic flow near the crack tip. Yet, in regards of resistance to crack growth,
bond rupture plays a relatively small role in tougher materials. There is a plastic zone near the
crack tip of which the predicted stresses from equation (4.1-4.3) would be above the
material’s yield stress . Since the stress can’t rise above , the stress in the crack tip zone
17

are actually
rather than what was given in equation (4.1-4.3). By using equations (4.1-4.3),
the distance this zone extends along the x-axis can be found. With
, the distance at
which the crack tip stress reduces to
is retrieved as:

(4.9)

√
where,

Figure 7: Yield is the limiting factor of the stress within zone

[8].

In Figure 7, this relation is demonstrated. The plastic zone size will increase when the stress
intensity is increased, either by raising the imposed stress or by crack lengthening. However,
the material’s molecular or microstructural mobility is what the extent of the plastic flow is
ultimately limited by. This means that the zone can become only so large. Unstable
propagation follows when the zone can grow no larger and therefore the crack can no longer
be constrained. It can be considered that the value of , at which this occurs, is a material
property named
.
The plastic zone size should not be too large as to interact with the specimen’s free
boundaries or to destroy the rudimentary nature of the singular stress distribution in order for
the measured value of
to be valid. The specimen geometry for the ASTM specification for
fracture toughness testing [17] is specified to insure that the specimen is large compared to the
crack length and the plastic zone size;
(

)

18

(

)

(4.10)

where a is the crack length, B is the breadth and W is the depth of the specimen. It can be
impossible to satisfy the above criteria in the case of when enough ductility exists. The view
of the stress intensity must in these cases be abandoned in favour of alternative techniques
such as the J-integral or the crack tip displacement (CTD) method (see subchapter 4.5 Elastoplastic fracture mechanics (EPFM) for further information).
Essentially, the measured fracture toughness
or
is a measure of the extent of plastic
deformation that is associated with crack propagation. When reducing the thickness of the
specimen in half, it will naturally cut the volume of plastically deformed material roughly in
half as well, and thus it is expected that the quantity of plastic flow scale linearly with the
specimen thickness. Consequently, the toughness rises linearly initially with the specimen
thickness as can be seen in Figure 8. What can also be seen is that eventually the toughness
reaches a maximum which is followed up with a fall to a lower value. The toughness reaches
a maximum at the critical thickness, . The loss of toughness beyond this value is extremely
important in the design against fracture since unrealistically optimistic values for
is yielded
when using too thin of a specimen in measuring toughness. For valid fracture toughness
testing, the specimen size requirements are such that the most conservative value is measured.

Figure 8: The influence of specimen thickness on toughness [8].

It is the critical thickness that causes the specimen to be dominated by a state of plane strain,
as opposed to plane stress. Since no traction is applied at the sides of the specimen the stress
in the through-thickness z direction must become zero. Furthermore, the stress will not have
room to rise to considerable values within the material for a thin specimen. The specimen will
experience a Poisson contraction that is given by
(
) and the strain in the z
direction is not zero. However, material near the centre will be unable to contract laterally
when the specimen is thicker which is due to the constraint of adjacent material. As the
material now tries to contract but is prevented from doing so, the z-direction strain is zero and
thus a tensile stress will ascend. At the outer surface the value of
rises from zero where it
reaches a maximum value that is given by
(
) at the critical thickness
as
shown in Figure 9. It is important that the specimen thickness t must be such that
in
order to guarantee that the plane strain conditions will dominate.

19

Figure 9: Transverse stress at crack tip [8].

4.4 Linear Elastic Fracture Mechanics (LEFM)
The local stresses in the vicinity of a crack tip are analysed according to the theory of
elasticity in linear elastic fracture mechanics. The stress field around the crack tip will exhibit
a singularity if the tip is considered to be infinitely sharp. This singularity can be quantified
by the stress intensity factor, K. The prediction of crack propagation can be done with Paris’
law that includes, among other variables, the range of stress intensity factor during a load
cycle,
;
(

)

(4.11)

Here, da/dN is the crack growth per load cycle while C and m are material parameters. In
order for the LEFM to be valid, the crack length must be large compared to the plastic zone
size. Materials that sustain large zones of plasticity or other type of damage before failure will
violate the small-scale yielding criterion [13].

4.5 Elasto-Plastic Fracture Mechanics (EPFM)
The stress intensity factors can only be used for quantifying the state of stress in the vicinity
of the crack tip as long as the plastic zone of the crack tip is regarded as small compared to
the distinguishing dimensions of the crack. Other measures for the local state of stress at the
crack tip needs to be implemented when this is no longer the case. One of these measures are
the J-integral which allow for a larger plastic zone but at the same time carries the limitation
of which strains are assumed to be small. Since the J-integral is an energy measure it will
always be positive and therefore this may lead to predicaments when defining stress cycles in
fatigue analysis. Also, since the J-integral was originally intended for non-linear elastic
behaviour, one must take special care. For instance, one needs to take precaution in studies of
which elasto-plastic loading is followed by elastic unloading. The fatigue impact can similarly
be assumed to relate to the relative displacement of certain material points across the crack
and adjacent to the crack tip. Crack tip displacement (CTD) is the title for this measure. One
20

of the main drawbacks with this approach is that it will be a challenge to define the CTD in a
distinctive manner [13].

4.6 Extended Finite Element Method (XFEM)
This subchapter is mainly based on the paper Crack growth simulation of stiffened fuselage
panels using XFEM techniques by Krishna Lok Singh, Kamal Keswani and Mallikarjun
Vaggar [21].
When dealing with continuous field problems the standard finite element method (FEM)
provides substantial advantages. It is however computationally expensive to retrieve accurate
solutions with polynomial approximations for discontinuous field problems. When treating
problems with evolving discontinuities, difficulties occur with mesh alignment with
discontinuity since the mesh needs to be regenerated at each step. Furthermore, the singularity
of the crack tip needs to be accurately represented by the approximation. The standard finite
element methods are based on the piecewise differentiable polynomial approximations.
Therefore, these methods are not well suited to problems with discontinuous rendering
singular solutions. In non-homogeneous materials the order of singularity of stress field near a
crack tip is same as that of the homogeneous materials. As the crack grows, there is a
significant need to re-mesh or mesh in order for it to conform to the features provided in the
traditional finite element methods. The introduction of the extended finite element method
(XFEM) is an answer to the deficiency of the standard finite element methods in this regard
and was created by Belytschko and Black [18].
The XFEM was developed to ease the difficulties in solving problems with localized features
that by mesh refinement are not efficiently resolved. Hence, the XFEM is used extensively in
many fields such as composites and fracture mechanics. To allow the presence of
discontinuities in an element, the method enriches degrees of freedom with special
displacement functions. The XFEM approximation is comprised of standard finite elements
and enriched elements. The standard finite elements are used in the major part of the domain
whereas the enriched elements are used in the enriched sub-domain. The enriched elements
are applied in order to capture special solution properties like discontinuities and singularities.
The main reason for adding enriched elements is to be able to expand the approximation space
function of standard FEM that consequently gives a more accurate solution closer to the
reality for the enriched approximation. XFEM is a very effective and versatile method to
simulate initiation and growth of a discrete crack along a definite path in contrast to finite
elements where continuous re-meshing is required.
The shape functions at node i can be denoted by
( ) and the corresponding nodal
displacement values of the dependent variable by . For the approximation of the standard
XFEM, a term for the standard finite element is used together with an enriched term that can
capture discontinuous characteristics (heavy-side functions, crack tip singularity) in the
domain k. The standard XFEM approximation ( ) can be expressed as:

21

( )

( )

∑

( ) ( )

∑

(4.12)

Where the classical standard finite element part is represented by the first term and the
enrichments based on the idea of the partition of unity approach is represented by the second
term. Here,
is the set of the enriched nodes,
is the unknown displacement of the
standard FEM at node i,
is the unknown enrichment at node i and ( ) is the local
enrichment function of node i. Any enrichment function ( ) holds

∑

( ) ( )

(4.13)

( )

based on the idea of the partition of unity. For capturing discontinuous characteristics in the
domain, the discontinuous function ( ) is utilized. The major key property of the standard
XFEM is that any function ( ) can be reproduced in the domain by local basis function
( ) ( ) in order to solve discontinuous problems.
The representation of the crack away from the tip can be simplified by the Heaviside
enrichment function, which is given by Jiang and Ying [19]. Two enrichment functions are
generally incorporated into the XFEM displacement approximation in order to represent a
crack. To represent the crack away from the tip, a Heaviside step function is used whereas for
representation of the crack tip asymptotic displacement field, a more complex set of functions
is utilized. The Heaviside step function can be expressed as:
( )

{

(4.14)

This enrichment given by the Heaviside step function introduces a discontinuity in
displacement across the crack. Four enrichment functions are given below for a linear elastic
crack tip. These are used to incorporate the crack tip displacement field into elements
containing the crack tip. From the asymptotic displacement field below, the crack-tip
enrichment functions can be obtained:
√
(

)

{
√

( )

√

( )
}

( )

√

(4.15)

( )

Here, and r are the polar coordinates in the local crack tip coordinate system. The crack tip
works as the origin and
is parallel to the crack. The first enrichment function acts as the
Heaviside enrichment due to being discontinuous across the crack behind the tip in the
element containing the crack tip. An example of a node being enriched by both the Heaviside
function and crack tip enrichment features can be seen in Figure 10.
22

Figure 10: Enrichments in the XFEM. Circles: nodes with 2 additional DOFs. Squares: nodes with 8 additional
DOFs [20].

A very important parameter for estimating the severity of a crack in cracked structures is the
stress intensity factor. In case of an edge-cracked rectangular plate under tensile loading, the
analytical solution for the stress intensity factor (SIF) is given by:
( )

√

(4.16)

The upcoming chapter FE-modelling is about the pre-processing of the fracture propagation
models. Here, the construction of the models is made where for instance the mesh, boundary
conditions, pressure distribution and traction is defined.

23

5 FE-Modelling
The main objective with the thesis has been to create one or several fracture propagation
models that can be utilized to predict crack growth and in the long run predict the failure of
the material. This chapter is therefore dedicated to describe the most essential and relevant
processes of designing the models in Abaqus together with clarifications of certain physical
properties. The results will be presented in the results and discussion chapter in addition to
analyses and interpretations of the results. The conclusions are gathered in the chapter with
the same name.
The simulation is done through Abaqus which is a software suite that was originally released
in 1978 and is used for its finite element analyses and computer-aided engineering. The
product suite that is used in this work is the Abaqus/CAE which is a software application that
can be used for both the modelling and analysis of mechanical components and assemblies
(pre-processing) and visualising the finite element analysis result (post-processing) [22].
It is important to mention that the damage initiation criterion and the pressure distribution
among other settings selected in Abaqus are not necessarily realistic values. Many different
settings and values have been tested (not all presented here though) for the main reason of
enhancing the understanding of different kinds of phenomena.
Before the simulation process can be explained, some simplifications and assumptions made
needs to be mentioned first. Firstly, when surface traction is applied apart from the pressure
distribution, sliding in full-slip is assumed. Only the tread is considered as the wheel contact
and it can be perceived as the interface of the models are visualised upside-down (since it’s
the wheel that is simulated, not the rail). The location of the wheel-rail contact stresses is the
same for every load cycle. For real circumstances though, the distribution of the pressure
would differ depending on the time period of which a certain section of the wheel is in
contact. For instance, the distribution would be different if the contact is in the beginning,
middle or end, and you could say that the load is moving on the contact patch.
A Matlab-script has been received from Saeed Hossein-Nia in order to understand where the
maximum principal shear stress is located (as can be read in chapter 3 about contact
mechanics). Therefore, the inclusion has been placed at the maximum principal shear stress
location for the case when the friction coefficient is
. This is done in order to increase
the chance of crack initiation and propagation. However, when the friction force is applied
and increased, even though the maximum principal shear stress will be shifted towards the
surface, the location of the inclusion has still been placed at the same point due to time
restrictions.
The fracture mechanics method used in Abaqus is XFEM, as mentioned and thoroughly
explained in the fracture mechanics chapter. Within the XFEM framework there are two
different approaches; the cohesive segment approach and the LEFM-based approach. The
cohesive segment approach follows the general framework for surface based cohesive
24

behaviour. It uses traction-separation laws and the damage properties are specified as part of
the bulk material definition. This is the approach used in this work. The LEFM-based
approach uses the virtual crack closure technique, VCCT, where the damage properties are
specified via an interaction property assigned to the XFEM crack. There is an option in the
interaction module in Abaqus that allow for selection of crack location. If this is not selected,
the crack initiates automatically wherever certain damage initiation criteria in the tractionseparation laws are exceeded. Automatic crack growth has been selected here for the two
different models. The type of damage can for instance be defined as maximum principal strain
or stress. The latter type of damage is used for all the models.

5.1 2D Model
The first model was designed in two dimensions with a so called 2D deformable shell element
for the sake of simplicity. Even though the depth dimension is neglected here, it can still give
some indications of some fracture phenomena (for more details, see chapter 4.3 about the
effect of specimen geometry). The precision of the results (stresses, crack extension, etc.)
depend on the resolution of the mesh. A fine mesh gives for instance often higher and more
precise stress distribution in the model. The downside with a fine mesh is that it is more
computationally expensive. The mesh element type used for this two-dimensional model is
called CPS4R and is a 4-node bilinear plane stress quadrilateral type of element with reduced
integration and hourglass control. The number of elements used in the model is 39351. The
mesh for the whole plate model is shown in Figure 11.

Figure 11: The mesh distribution for the 2D model.

One can notice that the mesh resolution is quite coarse away from the placed circle inclusion
below the origin of the coordinate system. Yet, it has been designed in a way so that the closer
one gets to the inclusion, the finer the mesh, as can be seen in Figure 12. This is deliberately

25

designed this way since the areas around the inclusion are the most vital regions in the study
of fracture.

Figure 12: Finer mesh closer to the inclusion.

Non-linear geometry is activated in order to achieve higher accuracy since the strains can be
quite substantial around the surface area of contact and around the inclusion. The material
properties for this model are,
and
. The maxps
value is the maximum principal stress that an element needs to exceed in order for a crack to
nucleate and/or propagate. The radius of the inclusion is in this model
, the
contact radius is
and the inclusion is placed in a depth of
. This is
the depth of which the principal shear stresses are maximum in the case of
, for the
Hertzian theory of line contact. The pressure distribution applied at the surface contact is
equal to equation (3.1), where
and x is defined on the interval:
. The traction is directed to the left and applied in the surface contact that is equal to
equation (3.2). Both the pressure distribution and the traction can be seen applied in the model
in Figure 13. The amplitude chosen for the simulation is shown in Figure 14 and is comprised
of 5 peaks. The boundary conditions are defined as being free in y-direction, with all the other
DOFs fixed for the two top corners. For the two bottom corners, all the DOFs are fixed.

26

Figure 13: The pressure distribution and traction applied at the contact surface.

Figure 14: Amplitude function used in order to simulate 5 cycles.

5.2 3D Model
The thin three-dimensional model is created with certain fracture mechanics theories in mind.
Especially the effect the thickness of the block model has on the fracture toughness, see
chapter 4.3 Effect of specimen geometry. This applies however mainly when plasticity is
considered. Consequently, material properties that consider plastic behaviour can
conveniently be implemented in the future.
This model’s material properties are also
. The
radius of the inclusion is in this model larger with
, the contact radius is
and the cylinder inclusion is placed in a depth of
. The pressure
distribution applied at the surface contact is equal to the equation (3.1), where
and
x is defined on the interval:
. The traction applied in the surface contact is
equal to equation (3.2). The thickness of the model is 2 mm. Both the pressure distribution
and the traction are for this 3D model constant in the z-direction (the through-thickness
direction) for the reason of simplifying the problem. The number of elements used in the
27

model is 17888. The mesh around the inclusion is shown in Figure 15. The pressure
distribution and traction are presented in Figure 16.

Figure 15: The mesh for the 3D model near the inclusion.

Figure 16: The pressure distribution and traction for the 3D model.

The next chapter visualises the results of the simulations along with interpretations of them.
28

6 Results and Discussions
Here follows the results for both the 2D and 3D model in regards to the Von Mises stress,
different tensile stresses, and crack propagation below the surface around the inclusion and at
the surface. The main focus of this chapter has been directed towards the 2D model.
Discussions and interpretations that are more general and revolve around both the 2D and 3D
model will be concentrated in chapter 6.3 General.

6.1 2D Model
The Von Mises stress distribution around the inclusion are shown in Figure 17, for a friction
coefficient of
. The stress near to the contact surface is approximately half of what the
maximum is and this maximum is retrieved at the sides of the inclusion.

Figure 17: The Von Mises stress distribution around the inclusion for

(no traction applied).

It seems though that the cracks are nucleating at the top of the inclusion for low friction
coefficients of 0.2 and below. This occurs even though the highest Von Mises stress is located
at the sides of the inclusion. This is because the maximum stress at the sides of the inclusion
is compressive stresses, and therefore a fracture is not able to open up. However, because of
tensile stresses at the top of the inclusion, fractures tend to extend, as can be seen in Figure 18
and 19 for the
and
stresses respectively. In these figures, the stresses are shown near
the inclusion as well as on the surface above the inclusion for three different friction values. It
can be seen that the maximum positive value for
and
is located at the top and bottom
of the inclusion and
is higher for the three tested friction values. This means that there is a
strong tensile stress that tends to open up the fracture. The maximum negative value for
is
located at the contact patch surface whereas it is located at the sides of the inclusion for the
. This signifies that there are compressive stresses near the surface in the longitudinal
direction and that the sides of the inclusion are exposed to compressive stresses in the vertical
direction.

29

Figure 18: The

stress distribution for different friction values.

30

Figure 19: The

stress distribution for different friction values.

When crack tips were placed on the sides of the inclusion and were allocated as a crack
(manual crack location) the crack did not propagate further than what was assigned. As
explained earlier, this happens most likely because of compressive stresses and the crack will
not further propagate.
One way to effectively visualise the patterns of the fractures is to use the field output request
function STATUSXFEM, which is a scalar variable that shows the extent of damage inside an

31

element. Another function called PHILSM represents the level set value
define the location of cracks inside a body.

Figure 20: Crack initiations near the inclusion (
) and at the surface (
propagation.

that is used to

) with follow up

In Figure 20, crack propagation for the friction coefficient
and
respectively,
is shown. A friction coefficient between these values is the critical point for when the crack
starts to initiate at the surface. For all friction coefficient values
, the crack initiates at
the top of the inclusion. Here, it seems that the crack only propagates a few elements towards
the surface for friction coefficients in the range of
to
. There are a few reasons
for why the propagation stops. It is presumably because of different options in Abaqus for
instance the type of pressure distribution and magnitude selected, along with how the load is
being applied, and obviously the properties of the material. Convergence difficulties of the
simulations have also been a problem and one of the reasons why the propagation stops after a
while.
When the friction coefficient is increased above 0.2, interesting things start to happen. Firstly,
it seems that Abaqus predicts longer extensions of the crack after around
before
sometimes stumbling upon convergence problems, which makes the simulation stop.
Attempts to reduce the convergence problems have been made through implementing
automatic stabilization as well as discontinuous analysis for the time increments for the static
step in order to allow for additional number of attempts when a solution is converging poorly.
Nonetheless, the most interesting phenomenon that follows is that the angle of which the
propagation pursues increases relative to the surface as the friction coefficient is increased
above 0.2, as can be seen in Figure 21. All the surface cracks seem to all initiate just outside
to the right of the contact surface where the pressure distribution and traction are being
applied. The reason for this initiation location can be because of a phenomenon called tearing,
which occurs due to a discontinuous application of traction. Just outside to the right of the
contact surface there is no pressure or traction being applied. However, just inside the contact
patch on the right side there is both a pressure distribution as well as traction with direction to
32

the left. This coaction is a discontinuity which induces a tearing effect that appears right at the
end of the contact surface to the right. What would be expected from the theory given in
chapter 3.1 Hertzian line contact in full-slip, is that the fracture would emerge at the surface
from the centre of the contact patch, at least for friction values equal to and above 0.4. The
reason being, the maximum principal shear stress is located at the surface very close to the
middle of the contact patch for friction values of 0.4 and above, see chapter 3.1.

Figure 21: Cracks initiated at the surface and propagated with different friction coefficients.

When the friction coefficient reaches
can be seen in Figure 22.

, the angle is relatively close to 90 degrees, as

33

(

Figure 22: Crack propagation in the case of pressure distribution and traction being of equal magnitude
), which result in a fracture pattern with a very steep angle. Left: the XFEM output function. Right: the
PHILSM output function.

6.2 3D Model
The situation of the crack propagation for the 3D model is quite similar to the 2D model
where the crack propagates just a few elements (at the top of the inclusion) in height for
friction coefficients up to 0.2. However, a broader region of several elements in x-direction is
propagated here compared to the 2D model’s only one element in the same direction. Figure
23 illustrates the crack propagation at the top of the inclusion for
. The difference
between the 2D and 3D model in this aspect might be due to the difference in fracture
toughness (which in turn is due to higher thickness for the 3D model).

Figure 23: Crack propagation at the top of the inclusion for

34

.

Figure 24: Crack propagation at the surface for

in the form of STATUSXFEM (left) and PHILSM
(right).

When the friction coefficient is raised above 0.2, the crack start to initiate at the surface, just
like for the 2D model. In Figure 24, an example of a small propagation of a crack at the
surface is visualised for
. Even though the surface crack seems to initiate at the same
location in general, the extension is nevertheless just one element. The main reason for this is
that the simulation got into convergence problems and stopped unexpectedly.

6.3 General
The fracture mechanics method that has been used here in Abaqus is a cohesive segment
approach based on XFEM. The other alternative is to use the LEFM method with VCCT for
fracture analysis. This linear elastic fracture method is only valid when crack lengths are
larger compared to the plastic zone size. Since no inelastic behaviours of the material has
been considered, both the methods should be reasonable to use with decent accuracy.
However, an elasto-plastic fracture mechanics method (EPFM) would most likely have better
accuracy in the case when plastic behaviour of the material wants to be considered into the
fracture analysis.
The location of the inclusion has been constant for all different friction values for both the 2D
and 3D model. The location for the inclusion has been where the maximum principal shear
stress is located with no applied traction (
). This has been employed deliberately in
order to reduce the time needed to model but also the time for the simulations. Though, this is
a problem when interpreting the results of the fracture patterns etc. since the inclusions are not
placed at the coordinates where the maximum principal shear stress is located for higher
friction values than zero. This means that the initiation and propagation of the fracture might
be altered depending on where the inclusions have been placed.
There are several more potential margins of error in the simulation process apart from the
ones described above. Firstly, the mesh density has certainly an impact on the quality and
accuracy of the post-processing results such as stresses and patterns of a crack. The mesh
35

element type also definitely has an influence on the results and the higher number of nodes
that the mesh type contains; generally the higher accuracy is achieved. The mesh for the 3D
model is very coarse away from the inclusion and this might be the reason why the surface
cracks are not propagating longer than one element. Also, the simulation increment size has
been selected to 0.01 and can also affect the results if increased or reduced. It is especially
undesirable to have an increment size that is too large since the resolution of the simulation
and its animation will be curtailed in the form of stutter and omitted frames.
The difference in fracture toughness for the 2D model compared to the 3D model might have
an impact on the propagation patterns since the propagation extends broader for the 3D
model. However, it might be other explanations for this effect to occur and the difference in
fracture toughness between the models would most likely be higher in the case of plastic
behaviour of the material used in the simulation.
The cohesive segment approach and the LEFM VCCT method assume different procedures in
order to analyse crack growth. Thus, the different XFEM methods probably give a slight
difference in the results from the post-processing since the two methods are a bit different in
the fundamental basis. Furthermore, the actual premise for crack initiation and further growth
is specified in the damage properties of the material in the form of maximum principal stress.
This chosen maximum principal stress value needs to be experimentally retrieved for different
materials in different conditions and environments in order to achieve correct crack initiation
and propagation.
Both the pressure distribution and the traction have without doubt large influence on the
outcome in the post-process. Especially important are the assigned magnitudes of the pressure
and traction. Likewise, the material properties are of paramount significance for the fracture
process.
It is of great importance to solve the problems and reduce the margins of error that are
mentioned in this chapter. This is further discussed in chapter 8 future work and research.

36

7 Conclusions
There are several conclusions that can be made from the simplified FE-models that have been
constructed in this thesis and they are furthermore presented in this chapter.
For the 2D model, compressive stresses at the sides of the inclusion inhibit initiation of
fractures, and tensile stresses at the top and bottom of the inclusion facilitates the opening of
the fracture at the top. The fracture initiates at the inclusion, specifically at the top, when
friction coefficients are equal to or below the value 0.2. The fracture propagates a few
elements upwards in the first static cycle. For friction coefficients above the value 0.2, the
fracture initiates at the surface. This occurs specifically at the boundary where the pressure
distribution and traction is applied at the right side, when the traction direction is to the left.
The likely cause of this fracture initiation at this surface location is tearing. The fracture
propagates downwards with an angle and along a certain well-defined line. The pattern of the
fracture propagation for a surface crack depends on the friction coefficient value. Specifically,
the angle of a surface crack increases relative to the surface as the friction coefficient value is
increased.
Compared to the 2D model, the fracture for the 3D model extends broader at the top of the
inclusion in the case of friction coefficient values equal to or below 0.2. At friction coefficient
values above 0.2, the fracture initiates at the same location as for the 2D model. However, the
propagation is non-existent due to convergence problems.
The FE-models constructed are initial steps towards analysing the fracture propagation and
closely related phenomena for a railway freight wheel in detail. This thesis can therefore be
seen as a contribution to the research in the area and to reduce the accidents as well as the
maintenance for railway wheels. These motives have direct positive association to the society
and its economy as a whole. The potential reduction of the rate of wear of railway wheel steel
is additionally less harmful for the environment. At the current stage, the simplified models
give mainly information about the fracture initiation, propagation and its patterns. From this
first phase, further adjustments and improvements can take place in order to eliminate the
margins of error. In the long run, fully integrated models with further implementations such as
detailed microstructure for the contact conditions, plastic behaviour for the material, and
complete three-dimensional models can finally be employed.

37

8 Future Work and Research
The FE-models that have been designed in this thesis are initial work before they can be fully
utilized with relation to the wear rate with contact conditions and material properties etc.
Many simplifications have been made in order to achieve certain results and make progress in
the given tight time frame. Most of the options that have been neglected for the time being are
in Abaqus thus reasonably straightforward to implement in the case of further work and
research being put into this area. From this background, it has been important to keep a
balance for what is presented in this work which has inevitably lead to plenty of future
potential improvements in several areas.
Firstly, by studying many sources of fracture mechanics, some state that cyclic loading can in
some cases be necessary in order for the fracture to further propagate. Also, the number of
load cycles has definitely an impact on the extension of a crack. The main limitation of
implementing these measures are that it is time consuming but can also create problems where
the errors can be more difficult to solve.
Simplifications has been made for the wheel contact in form of the Hertzian theory as well as
full-slip condition. This has made the implementation of the loads in Abaqus substantially
more straightforward. However, stresses, wear and fractures depends greatly on the
methodologies and assumptions used, since their accuracies vary. In this case, the Hertzian
theory for the normal contact problem has been shown to be not very accurate in the
estimation of the shear stresses. Moreover, the full-slip condition used in this work is not
realistic in all situations and therefore partial slip could be implemented and further
researched in the context of creating a fracture propagation model. When speaking of reality,
instead of applying a static load (or continuous cyclic loads) at the same location over and
over, a moving contact pressure distribution could be applied instead, in order to simulate the
wheel rolling over its inclusion or crack. This could give more detailed and accurate results in
regards to for instance nucleation locations and fracture patterns. What could also change the
patterns of the crack and the premises of which the cracks initiate is the depth of the
inclusions or voids. Therefore, for future analyses, the determined depth of an inclusion could
be varied as well as shifted in longitudinal direction in order to place the inclusions over the
areas of where the principal shear stress is maximum for when the friction coefficient
.
It can be difficult to generate a failure of the material in form of a delamination process if
only one crack initiates at the top of the inclusion and then propagates to the surface.
Therefore, for the sake of trying to simulate a removal of a particle from the surface,
deliberate and manual placements of cracks can be done, for instance two above of the
inclusion with a certain angle that separate them.
Again, because of streamlining the work in order to be able to get some initial results in time,
only elastic material properties has been used. This has been especially effective due to the
adoption of XFEM in Abaqus for the crack propagation approach since it uses linear elastic
fracture mechanics methods. However, to be able to account for the plasticity of a material,

38

especially around the crack tips, an elasto-plastic fracture mechanics method is needed.
Though, this method is not as well implemented into FE-software as the LEFM is.
There are improvements that can be made for the boundary conditions applied in the models.
More accurate solutions are most likely for instance absorbing boundary conditions or infinite
boundaries that will absorb the energy at the boundaries which the pressure applied at the
contact patch releases.
For all the different models constructed in this work, from two dimensions to three, finer
mesh is needed in order to increase the accuracy of the stresses calculated in the bulk of the
material, especially near the inclusions or the crack tips. Yet, for three dimension models, this
is notably more computationally expensive compared to two dimension models. This creates
the demand of powerful computers in order to reduce the simulation time. Aside from
increasing the resolution of the mesh, a mesh element type with many nodes is also very
important to select in order to achieve a higher precision in the stresses.
In order to for instance change direction of traction and propagate cracks in a 3D domain, a
full 3D model can be constructed. This would open up to more complex results as well as
more possibilities for alterations of different settings in Abaqus.
A large step towards developing the models is to take the asperities and the surface roughness
into account in the contact of the wheel and rail. This can be done through the microstructural
analysis of different wear mechanisms done by CAF MiiRA. The fracture propagation models
should be able to be utilized in companies and for future research if further development is
ensued adhering to the above.

39

References
[1] https://shift2rail.org/about-shift2rail/, last visited 2018-08-03.
[2] http://projects.shift2rail.org/s2r_ip5_n.aspx?p=FR8RAIL, last visited 2018-08-03.
[3] B. Dirks, Vehicle dynamics simulation of wheel wear for Swedish high-speed train
X2000, 2003.
[4] S. Hossein-Nia, On Heavy-Haul Wheel Damages using Vehicle Dynamics Simulation,
2018.
[5] R. G. Bayer, Wear Analysis for Engineers, 2002.
[6] I. M. Hutchings, Tribology – Friction and Wear of Engineering Materials, 1992.
[7] N. P. Suh, An overview of the delamination theory of wear, Wear, Volume 44, Issue 1,
1977, Pages 1-16.
[8] D. Roylance, Introduction to Fracture Mechanics, 2001.
[9] P. Davy, R. L. Goc and C. Darcel, A model of fracture nucleation growth and arrest and
consequences for fracture density and scaling, Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth,
Volume 118, Issue 4, 2013.
[10] S. A. G. Oliveira and A. F. Bower, An analysis of fracture and delamination in thin
coatings subjected to contact loading, Wear, Volume 198, Issues 1-2, 1996, Pages 15-32.
[11] Spriestersbach et al, Crack initiation mechanisms and threshold values of very high cycle
fatigue failure of high strength steels, Procedia Engineering, Volume 74, 2014, Pages 84-91.
[12] M. Zhu and F. Xuan, Fatigue Crack Initiation Potential from Defects in terms of Local
Stress Analysis, Chinese Journal of Mechanical Engineering, Volume 27, Issue 3, 2014, Pages
496-503.
[13] A. Ekberg, Rolling contact fatigue on railway wheels, 2000.
[14] Y. Murakami and M. Endo, Effects of defects, inclusions and inhomogeneities on fatigue
strength, International Journal of Fatigue, Volume 16, Pages 163-182, 1994.
[15] Y. Murakami, S. Kodama and S Konuma, Quantitative evaluation of effects of nonmetallic inclusions on fatigue strength of high strength steels. I: basic fatigue mechanism and
evaluation of correlation between the fatigue fracture stress and the size and location of nonmetallic inclusions, International Journal of Fatigue, Volume 11, Pages 291-298, 1989.
[16] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fracture_mechanics, last visited 2018-08-03.
[17] E 399-83, Standard Test Method for Plane-Strain Fracture Toughness of Metallic
Materials, ASTM, 1983.
[18] T. Belytschko and T. Black, Elastic Crack Growth in Finite Elements with Minimal
Remeshing, International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering, 45, 1999, Pages
601-620.
[19] S. Jiang, Z. Ying and C. Du, The optimal XFEM approximation for fracture analysis,
IOP Conference Series: Materials Science and Engineering, Volume 10, Number 1, 2010.
[20] E. Giner, N. Sukumar, J. E. Tarancón and F. J. Fuenmayor, An Abaqus implementation
of the extended finite element method, Engineering Fracture Mechanics, 76, 2009, Pages 347368.
[21] K. L. Singh, K. Keswani and M. Vaggar, Crack growth simulation of stiffened fuselage
panels using XFEM techniques, Indian Journal of Engineering & Materials Sciences, Volume
21, 2014, Pages 418-428.
[22] https://www.3ds.com/products-services/simulia/products/, last visited 2018-08-03.
40

TRITA-SCI-GRU 2018:321
ISBN 978-91-7729-905-9

TRITA 2018:321

www.kth.se

