Sam's (John Bradley) watch almost ends at the hands of a wight, but Jon's (Kit Harington) direwolf, Ghost, and Commander Jeor Mormont (James Cosmo) come to his rescue, prompting the Night's Watch to return to the Wall to warn the others. Also alive is Davos (Liam Cunningham), who survived the Battle of the Blackwater and returns to Dragonstone, where he unsuccessfully tries to kill Melisandre (Carice van Houten). In Astapor, Dany (Emilia Clarke) is considering purchasing a group of enslaved eunuch soldiers, known as the Unsullied.


It's bad news and worse news for Catelyn (Michelle Fairley) and Robb (Richard Madden): Her father is dead and Winterfell has been ransacked, with no sign of Bran (Isaac Hempstead Wright) or Rickon (Art Parkinson). Catelyn's hope of a reunion with Arya (Maisie Williams) and Sansa (Sophie Turner) hits a speed bump when a duel between Brienne (Gwendoline Christie) and Jaime (Nikolaj Coster-Waldau) ends with their discovery by a Bolton bannerman, Locke (Noah Taylor).


Littlefinger (Aidan Gillen) is set to marry Lysa (Kate Dickie), meaning Tyrion (Peter Dinklage) will reluctantly be the new Master of Coin. Dany isn't spending coin on the Unsullied; instead, she offers a dragon in exchange for the soldiers and Missandei. It's a big episode for boys, as Gilly (Hannah Murray) gives birth to one, while Ramsay frees Theon and later saves him from those trying to recapture him. Brienne and Jaime are far from free; after Jaime convinces Locke not to rape Brienne, he tries to secure his own release.


Theon confesses to the then-unnamed boy that he didn't kill Bran and Rickon; he saw Ned (Sean Bean, who appeared in season one) as his father, and he regrets the betrayal. The betrayals continue when the boy leads Theon right back to his captors. At Craster's Keep, the Night's Watch men have tired of the conditions and kill both Craster (Robert Pugh) and Commander Mormont leading Sam to run for it with Gilly and her son.

The remaining Lannister siblings are paired off as Tywin (Charles Dance) orders Tyrion to marry Sansa and Cersei (Lena Headey) to marry Loras (Finn Jones). At the same time, a vulnerable Jaime tells Brienne his side of the Kingslayer tale, sharing that the Mad King was going to burn down the city. The Hound (Rory McCann), who has been captured by the Brotherhood Without Banners (men who've sworn to protect all smallfolk), gets the chance to win his freedom in a trial by combat. He emerges victorious by killing their leader, Beric (Richard Dormer), who is then brought back to life by Red Priest Thoros. Off in another cave, Jon sleeps with Ygritte (Rose Leslie), proving that he does know something. Elsewhere, Robb's decision to execute a former ally, Rickard Karstark (John Stahl), for killing two young Lannisters costs him the Karstark forces.


As Jon and the Wildlings prepare to climb the Wall, Ygritte says she knows that he's still faithful to the Night's Watch but will now be devoted to her. After barely making it to the top, they share a romantic kiss. Meanwhile, Robb is paying for his romantic decision as he tries to get the help of Walder Frey (David Bradley). The older man says he'll join forces if Robb apologizes for not marrying one of his daughters, and Uncle Edmure takes on the obligation. Over in King's Landing, Littlefinger departs without Sansa; he also leaves Ros (Esmé Bianco) behind to be brutally murdered by Joffrey (Jack Gleeson) or betray his confidence.


Theon's torture reaches new levels of cruelty when he's turned into a eunuch. Jaime, no stranger to losing a limb, is being escorted to King's Landing — but without Brienne, who he learns won't be ransomed. He rushes back to Harrenhal, rescuing her from a face-off with a bear and eventually securing her release. Fresh off freeing the Unsullied, Dany now has her eyes set on Yunkai, home to 200,000 enslaved people.


The big day has arrived for Sansa and Tyrion. After Joffrey humiliates his uncle during the wedding, the reception becomes even tenser as a drunk Tyrion refuses to participate in the bedding ceremony. Once the newlyweds return to their room, Tyrion says they won't share a bed until Sansa is ready. Over in Dragonstone, Gendry (Joe Dempsie) is sharing a bed with Melisandre, but things take a turn when she uses leeches to extract his king's blood, a ritual intended to bring down Robb, Joffrey, and Balon (Patrick Malahide).


Jon and Bran almost reunite when the Wildlings attempt to kill Jon, but he's saved when Bran wargs into his direwolf, Summer. Jon escapes, leaving Ygritte behind. Rickon leaves, too, as Osha (Natalia Tena) takes him to safety.

This episode is commonly known as the Red Wedding, in reference to the end of Edmure and Roslin Frey's (Alexandra Dowling) wedding reception, which goes from cheery to bloody when a pregnant Talisa (Oona Chaplin) is stabbed in the stomach, followed by the Stark bannermen being slaughtered and Robb getting shot with arrows. Catelyn tries to bargain for her son's life by threatening Walder Frey's wife, Kitty (Lucy Hayes), but the old man is unmoved. Roose stabs Robb and relays Jamie's regards. Crying, Catelyn slits Mrs. Frey's throat right before her own is cut.

Arya just missed the Red Wedding, but she did see the aftermath and kills a man who bragged about being involved. Yara (Gemma Whelan) sets out to rescue her brother, just as Cersei reunites with Jaime in King's Landing. While Dany is freeing those in Yunkai, Davos frees Gendry and only avoids death by sharing Maester Aemon's (Julian Glover) letter from the Wall about the White Walkers, which is backed up by Melisandre seeing the war to come in the fire. The warning is due to the return of Sam and Jon, the latter of whom was shot by Ygritte.

