The balance of power starts to readjust in the wake of Tywin’s death. Up north, Stannis fails to persuade the Wildlings to join his army and march on Winterfell. Across the sea, Varys tries to convince a drunk Tyrion to throw his support behind Dany, who is currently struggling with the politics of ruling. Down south, Cersei and Jaime grieve their father’s passing as Margaery plots to pull herself out from under the former’s thumb.

 Brienne runs into Sansa (and Littlefinger) at an inn and offers her protection, but Sansa, like her sister Arya before her, rejects her help. Nevertheless, Brienne resolves to follow her, just in case. Jaime recruits Bronn to travel to Dorne and rescue his and Cersei’s daughter, Myrcella.


 All about the Starks! H’ghar forces Arya to discard all of her personal belongings, while Jon’s tenure as Lord Commander begins with him executing an insubordinate guard. In Volantis, Mormont recognizes Tyrion in a brothel and kidnaps him as a present for Dany, unknowingly helping the wayward Lannister. In King’s Landing, Margaery and Tommen get married and waste no time consummating their union. (Ew.)


 Reactionary and rebellious groups become bolder in both King’s Landing—where Cersei empowers the Sparrows to arrest sinners, including Loras—and in Meereen, where the Sons of the Harpy launch a devastating attack on the Unsullied. Less interestingly, Jaime and Bronn land in Dorne as the Sand Snakes (Oberyn’s bastard daughters) plot to kidnap Myrcella.

In the wake of the Sons of the Harpy’s violence, Dany lets her anger get the better of her and feeds a nobleman to her dragons. But after some thinking, she decides to compromise and agrees to reopen the fighting pits to free men — and to marry one of the city’s nobles as a sign of goodwill. Jon also makes nice with enemies: At the Wall, he persuades Tormund to take him to meet the rest of the Wildlings to negotiate a truce, much to the rest of the Night’s Watch’s dismay. Historic moment: Tyrion sees his first dragon right before he and Jorah are attacked by the diseased Stone Men. Unfortunately, one of the infected attackers manages to touch Jorah. At Winterfell, Sansa comes face-to-face with Theon.

At Cersei’s urging, the Faith Militant begin an inquest and arrest Margaery for lying about her brother’s homosexuality. Similarly, the Dornish guards break up Jaime and Bronn’s tussle with the Sand Snakes and throws the lot of them in jail. Meanwhile, slavers capture Tyrion and Jorah; however, Tyrion convinces them to let Jorah fight for his freedom (and money) in the pits in Meereen.

Sansa asks Theon to help her send a message to her allies, but Theon snitches to Ramsay, who flays one of her allies. Cersei visits Margaery in prison, mostly to gloat, but Cersei’s fortunes take a turn when the High Sparrow reveals that he knows about her incestuous relationship with Lancel and has her arrested. In other words, the Queen Mother played herself by empowering the Faith Militant.


As a bitter Cersei languishes away in a cell, her brother Tyrion enjoys an audience with Dany, who decides to bring him on as an advisor and banishes Jorah once again. H’ghar sends Arya on her first mission for the Many-Faced God, and Theon reveals to Sansa that he lied about killing her two brothers, who, unless you forgot, don’t appear in season 5 at all.


In Dorne, Oberyn’s older brother — Prince Doran Martell­ — grants Jaime, Myrcella, and Bronn safe passage back to King’s Landing. And in Braavos, Arya crosses paths with another name on her kill list: Meryn Trant, the pedophilic knight of the Kingsguard who murdered her sword teacher.


Drogon drops Dany off in the middle of nowhere and she ends up getting captured by a horde of Dothraki riders, which can’t be good news. Oberyn’s lover, Ellaria Sand, murders Doran and poisons young Myrcella, who dies in her uncle/father’s arms on their ship bound for King’s Landing. And Sansa and Theon use the cover of Ramsay and Stannis’ battle to jump off the ramparts and escape Winterfell.
