Jon Snow (Kit Harington) is dead! His stabbed corpse is discovered by a group of people, including Davos (Liam Cunningham) and a few other allies. They drag him inside and plot to kill the traitorous Alliser Thorne (Owen Teale). Elsewhere, Cersei (Lena Headey) reunites with Jaime (Nikolaj Coster-Waldau) and subsequently learns of her daughter's death (and vows revenge — a twofer this episode!). Meanwhile, Sansa (Sophie Turner) and Theon (Alfie Allen) are on the run from Ramsay's (Iwan Rheon) men when they're saved by Podrick (Daniel Portman) and Brienne (Gwendoline Christie), the latter of whom Sansa invites into her service.

 Jon Snow is alive! The show rather dutifully approaches this inevitable plot turn, weaving Melisandre's personal crisis into the plot to resurrect him. She gets to work on Davos' ask, and, initially, her efforts appear unsuccessful — until everyone leaves the room. Arya (Maisie Williams) reunites with the Faceless Men, while Tyrion (Peter Dinklage) tensely unchains Dany's dragons (in a terrific sequence), and Bran's (Isaac Hempstead Wright) Greensight apprenticeship with the Three-Eyed Raven proves taxing for Meera (Ellie Kendrick). Roose (Michael McElhatton) and his wife, Walda Bolton (Elizabeth Webster), die at the hands of Ramsay, who also murders their son/his baby brother. Balon (Patrick Malahide) is also killed by his brother Euron (Pilou Asbæk).

A stunned Davos discovers Jon alive and well. Jon — who remembers being stabbed but nothing from his time unconscious — reclaims his Lord Commander cape and, while struggling to return to normal strength, assents to the hanging of Thorne and other traitors before killing them himself. Dany's situation, meanwhile, continues to deteriorate; and Cersei and Jaime's vengeance plot is interrupted by the council's desire to avoid them entirely. Arya's sight is restored! Young Rickon (Art Parkinson) is revealed as Ramsay's new prisoner. (Oof.) Bran is taken deeper into the past by the Three-Eyed Raven, observing the circumstances leading up to Robert's (Mark Addy) Rebellion. Varys (Conleth Hill) and Tyrion continue to helm Meereen, this time with the news coming in that the Free City of Volantis has been secretly funding the Sons of the Harpy.



 The season kicks into gear with this standout installment. Sansa, Brienne, et al. arrive at Castle Black, where Jon is at last reunited with his Stark sister. ("We never should have left Winterfell," he tells her — yeah, maybe!) They agree it's time to take out Ramsay; at the same time, Littlefinger (Petyr Baelish) is mobilizing forces against him. But Ramsay still has some leverage: In a letter to Jon, he threatens to hurt Rickon if Sansa is not returned. Cersei and Jaime align more closely with their uncle, Kevan Lannister (Ian Gelder), and Lady Olenna (Diana Rigg) to oust the Sparrows. And then, of course, the explosive ending: After her meeting with the khals in the temple of the Dosh Khaleen, Dany burns them all to death in one of the series' most cathartic scenes.

 The One Where Hodor Dies. Need we say more? Okay, fine: Before leaving Castle Black, Jon and Sansa visit Littlefinger and offer support; Sansa also forces Littlefinger to confront the reality of her trauma. Arya vies to prove her loyalty in Braavos by killing an actress — but, in turn, must watch a theatrical reenactment of season 1's events, namely the death of her father. Red Priestess Kinvara (Ania Bukstein) meets with Varys and reminds him of his trauma (a lot of that in this episode) while pledging assistance to a newly empowered Dany. And, crucially, we learn the origin story of the White Walkers: that they were created by the Children of the Forest as weapons. How fitting that the episode ends with the Walkers surrounding the cave along with the Night King — livened by one of Bran's visions — and executing a massacre; killing the Three-Eyed Raven, a few Children, and beloved Hodor (Kristian Nairn). But not before we get a glimpse into Hodor's past and how he became who he is.


 Arya watches the second half of the troupe's great, meta performance of all things Thrones; including a caricatured version of Tyrion killing his father. Arya ends up saving Lady Crane's life and leaving with Needle — indicating she's forsaken the Faceless Men. Sam (John Bradley) plays the role of a good son before escaping with Gilly (Hannah Murray), baby Sam, and the Valyrian steel sword that hung on the wall. Dany gives a speech ensuring Dothraki loyalty. Bran is stuck deep in visions and on the verge of catastrophe before being saved by a mysterious "rider"; he and Meera learn it's his uncle Benjen Stark (Joseph Mawle), who hasn't appeared since season 1's third episode. And Jaime tries to save Margaery (Natalie Dormer), who's been in a prison cell all season, but is stunned to see she's united with the High Sparrow and Tommen — a sign of aligning between the crown and faith.

 The Hound (Rory McCann) is…alive? That's right: After Arya seemingly left him for dead, the man of few words is revealed to have survived. (A season of back-from-the-deads, this is.) Much of the episode also moves Jon, Sansa, and Davos back to the fore, and their story line is largely intercut with the Hound's return to action. Jon and Sansa contemplate assembling their army, making a deal with never-to-be-trusted Littlefinger, and keeping the Wildlings on their side; the Hound, meanwhile, gives up a potential life of peace for a chance at revenge. Elsewhere, the High Sparrow (Jonathan Pryce) makes a veiled threat against Lady Olenna, after which Margaery persuades her grandmother to return to Highgarden.
A fairly dull episode that sets up the best one-two punch in GoT history. The episode's title obviously refers to Arya, who formally rejects the Faceless Men and prepares to return to Westeros. (She also rejects the acting troupe, which could have made a great spin-off.) Jaime, while helping the Freys take Riverrun back from the Tullys, reveals to Edmure Tully (Tobias Menzies) — surprise! — that he really only cares about Cersei and will do anything to get back to her. Ultimately, Jaime agrees to give Edmure safe passage to the North if he allows the Lannisters and Freys to peacefully occupy the castle and hang their banners over its walls, which he does. Cersei places a bounty on Sansa's head. The Hound is back to killing and is pitched to join the Brotherhood Without Banners. Tyrion spots ships headed into Meereen, with Missandei (Nathalie Emmanuel) noting the slavers have come to reclaim their property. Dany is back with Drogon.

 The season comes into much tighter focus, with "Battle" splitting its time between Meereen and the fight for Winterfell. Jon and Ramsay face off in an anticipated confrontation that lives up to the hype; just when it seems the battle against the encroaching Masters' fleet is lost. In a thrilling reunion, Dany rides Drogon and — assisted by Rhaegal and Viserion — burns the fleet, sparing only one master. Ramsay is beaten and taken prisoner by Jon, where he meets his fate — to fans' deep satisfaction.
Cersei's great revenge. Everyone in King's Landing gathers for her demise at her and Loras' trial at the Sept of Baelor in this spectacular season finale. But Cersei remains in her keep a little too long; her cousin Lancel (Eugene Michael Simon) is sent to retrieve her. Her great plan unfolds: Lancel finds a wildfire cache on the verge of exploding and is stabbed before he's able to put it out. Margaery is the first to realize something's wrong — that a trap has been set — but she's too late. The High Sparrow doesn't let anyone leave. The wildfire is ignited, and the Sept (and everyone inside) is annihilated. Jaime reunites with Cersei, who — utterly gleeful over her perfectly executed scheme and unaware that it prompted Tommen (Dean-Charles Chapman) to commit suicide — is crowned Queen of the Seven Kingdoms.

