Tyrion (Peter Dinklage) arrives at King's Landing and informs everyone that Tywin (Charles Dance) — busy with war — has named him acting Hand, much to Cersei's (Lena Headey) dismay. An order goes out to murder all of Robert's (Mark Addy) bastards, but Gendry (Joe Dempsie) is already on the road north. Dany (Emilia Clarke) and the Dothraki — accompanied by her freshly hatched dragons — are struggling in the Red Waste, so she sends three riders off in search of life. The Night's Watch crew enters creepy Craster's (Robert Pugh) home and meets all of his daughters/wives. In Dragonstone, Red Priestess Melisandre (Carice van Houten) converts Stannis Baratheon (Stephen Dillane), Robert's brother, to the ways of the Lord of Light. Stannis' knight Davos Seaworth (Liam Cunningham) is not a Melisandre fan and wants Stannis to make peace with his brother Renly (Gethin Anthony) or join Robb Stark (Richard Madden), but Stannis, believing himself the rightful heir to the throne, takes a hard pass. He also sends ravens with the news — imparted to him by Ned Stark (Sean Bean) — that Cersei's children are Jaime's (Nikolaj Coster-Waldau). Robb sends Catelyn (Michelle Fairley) to ask Renly to join them, and Theon (Alfie Allen) offers to secure ships from his dad.

Theon heads home to the Iron Islands and promptly hits on his sister, Yara (Gemma Whelan), not recognizing her after so many years away. His cranky father, Balon (Patrick Malahide), is unimpressed by his returning son and says he's not joining Robb's — or anyone's — army. Arya (Maisie Williams) admits to Gendry that she's Ned's daughter. In King's Landing, Tyrion is nervous that Shae (Sibel Kekilli) has met with Varys (Conleth Hill), and a raven arrives with word of the White Walkers.

Jon shares the horrifying news of Craster's baby sacrifices with Commander Mormont (James Cosmo), who already knew. Catelyn visits Renly in hopes of forging an alliance. Renly later has trouble forging an alliance with his wife, Margaery Tyrell (Natalie Dormer), in the bedroom; she helpfully offers to invite her brother, Loras (Finn Jones), in to assist. Tyrion assigns Shae to be Sansa's (Sophie Turner) handmaiden and orders Cersei's daughter, Myrcella (Nell Tiger Free), to Dorne to be married. Arya saves H'ghar's (Tom Wlaschiha) and Gendry's lives from Lannister bannermen.


In King's Landing, Joffrey (Jack Gleeson) rains more cruelty on Sansa and a pair of prostitutes. Tyrion enlists his sister's young lover, — and cousin, natch — Lancel Lannister (Eugene Simon), to spy on Cersei. Arya and Gendry wind up prisoners at the very bleak Harrenhal, where Tywin puts Arya to work as a cupbearer since he knows she's a girl. Dany and her road-weary crew are, eventually, welcomed into the gorgeous city of Qarth. The remaining Baratheon bros. meet and come to no peace accord.



Catelyn is conferring with Renly when, to her and Brienne's horror, Melisandre's shadow monster enters the tent and kills him. The women flee and Brienne pledges her service to Catelyn. Loras and Margaery also escape as Stannis' troops arrive, and Renly's men switch their allegiance to him. Tyrion gets a load of the wildfire Cersei is cooking up in King's Landing; Dany turns down a proposal of marriage in Qarth; and absolutely everybody dunks on Theon, who is given one ship and got the (not-so-)bright idea to take Winterfell, which triggers Bran's (Isaac Hempstead Wright) dream of the sea crashing into his home.


Theon takes Winterfell in the most honor-free way imaginable, and with no foresight for strategy. Osha (Natalia Tena) manages to escape with Bran, his brother Rickon (Art Parkinson), and a servant, Hodor (Kristian Nairn); Jon and Qhorin come face to face with some Wildlings, including a particularly fierce redhead. In King's Landing, Joffrey's bodyguard, Sandor "the Hound" Clegane (Rory McCann), rescues Sansa from a melee when a crowd rose up against the king. At Harrenhal, H'ghar takes a second man's life, helping Arya narrowly avoid Tywin discovering she's a Stark. Roose tells Robb he'll send his bastard to take Winterfell back from Theon. In Qarth, there's a grand theft dragon!


Unable to carry out Qhorin's order to kill Ygritte, Jon finds himself captured by her Wildling pals. When Theon discovers Bran and Rickon escaped Winterfell, he kills two local boys and burned their bodies to display as decoys; he feels bad, but also needs to assert himself. A frantic Dany searches for her dragons in Qarth, blood is shed. In King's Landing, Sansa is distraught to discover she got her first period, which means she could now bear Joffrey's children. Meanwhile, Jaime — still in Robb's custody — kills his cousin in an (ultimately botched) escape attempt. During a chat about history, Tywin deduces that Arya is highborn and says she reminds him of Cersei­­.

Yara is not impressed with Theon taking a castle so far from the sea and "killing" the strategically valuable Stark children. Both captured, Qhorin tells Jon he should kill him, so the Wildlings will trust him. Robb talks marriage — and gets up close and personal — with Talisa. He also discovers that Catelyn sent Jaime off with Brienne to swap for her daughters, believing Cersei had them both. So naturally, Robb arrests his mother. In the bowels of Winterfell, Osha reveals to Stark loyalist Maester Luwin (Donald Sumpter) that she, the boys, and Hodor doubled back. Arya, Gendry, and their friend Hot Pie (Ben Hawkey) escape Harrenhal, thanks to H'ghar's final murder on Arya's behalf. Tyrion is rightfully worried that Joffrey, and King's Landing, are not prepared for the fight with Stannis' approaching fleet.

The Battle of Blackwater is now upon King's Landing. Tyrion's various strategies, including the deployment of wildfire to fend off approaching ships, turn out to be (gruesome) winners. A cowardly Joffrey scuttles away when the tides began to turn, leaving Tyrion to rally the troops to hold the line: "Those are brave men knocking at our door, let's go kill them." All hope seems like it might be lost, and just as Tyrion is injured — by one of his own men — he sees Tywin leading a fresh army to the rescue. Sitting on the Iron Throne, Cersei is poised to poison her youngest son, Tommen (Dean-Charles Chapman), should the keep be breached, but is relieved when a triumphant Tywin strides into the throne room.


Victory's spoils include Tywin becoming Hand to Joffrey again, Littlefinger being awarded Harrenhal, and Margaery receiving the booby prize of marrying the king. Tyrion, essentially powerless, nurses his wounds and the knowledge that Cersei orchestrated the attack on him. Robb secretly marries Talisa while the Brienne & Jaime Show continues apace; Roose's bastard son seizes Winterfell from Theon; and Bran and the gang head for the Wall. Dany is reunited with her dragons in Qarth. H'ghar gives Arya a coin that will help her in the future. Back at Dragonstone, Stannis is mad at Melisandre, since he lost the battle. She continues to tell him he'll be king and entrances him with fire. Qhorin goads Jon into killing him, and the Wildlings free him.

